[Music]
you could have one heck of a furniture
sale and you're still not going to fill
every single one of those parking spots
to a planner this looks like wasted
space to a business it means customers
so stores provide plenty of it right
here in central Indianapolis a big black
parking lot surrounded by tall buildings
after World War II many cities in
America did this thinking oh it's
convenient it give people a place to
park when they go downtown but that
parking has to go somewhere so those
shops really close together so you can
walk places they tore half of them down
for parking so you now have to walk
farther because you have to walk past
the parking lots yeah so forget it I'll
just drive which means we have to build
even more parking lots which spreads
things out even more and then that can
get really out of hand look what they
did to pour downtown Denver back in the
1960s they tore half the city down for
more parking and what's even more
insulting those parking lots stop
generating sales tax Rue and to add to
the spiral parking lots also dry up the
property tax value it's just a cruel
fact that parking lots don't make money
at least not for the city and so if
there was a way that the city could
allow the developer to cash this in turn
this into land that does make money
building and developments without losing
any of the parking lots that the
businesses need to have customers come
to their business well that would be
quite the magic trick now wouldn't
it this building that we built we leased
up during Co it's 100% leased over four
decades Michael garvey's built more than
a few buildings remarkable because I
understand right now is not the best
days for commercial commercial yeah we
we have an office building downtown in
the Indianapolis cvd that it's not doing
well but here in the suburb of caramel
where most people are driving their cars
construction is humming along parking
ends up being the financial Albatross of
the transaction you have to figure out
how to solve that so traditionally there
have only been two ways to get rid of a
big surface parking lot one is to
completely transform your city so people
can go about their business without
needing to store their car like when
they go shopping and that is a huge
effort just as Portland Oregon who have
been working on this for 40 years their
Headway has not come easily for
everywhere else the fact is automobile
traffic drives retail in America and for
a sub we above Indianapolis Indiana that
does not have a regional light rail
system it's not likely this is going to
work at least anytime soon so that takes
us back to the other thing we tend to do
which is scoop up all that surface
parking into a big parking garage
in the same way a skyscraper is high
density space for people a parking
garage is high density space for cars
and on paper it looks like the best of
both worlds because this car storage
building can free up lots of surface
parking lots that you can redevelop and
that lets people have their car and eat
it too figuratively speaking we don't
have oceans here we don't have mountains
how do we make this city attractive to
businesses Etc the strategy in Caramel
Indiana hide the parking somewhere where
you can't see it people might actually
walk places our office building you can
walk to I think it is 14 sit down
restaurants so in this video we're going
to split up the mayor is going to give
me a personal tour of the city in his
personal comfortable car and I am going
to put my money where my mouth is and
Hike the entire thing on foot yeah good
luck with that yeah thanks carmel's
former mayor is a bit of a housing
libertarian you know so many cities
especially Republican Suburban cities
they say oh we want you to come but you
got to live like everybody else well
it's not government's role to tell
people what kind of house they have to
live in when they're young they mount an
apartment or condo they have kids they
may want a house with a yard they're
retired they may want to be able to walk
places how does a suburb built after the
Advent of the car become a walkable
pedestrian traditional City it takes a
bit of effort to try to find where the
parking garages are and that is by
Design to be able to see any of garage
cuz we've wrapped it so the offic is out
front condos on one side and apartments
on the other too this five story
building that was built a few years ago
it just looks like parking has vanished
but with a close eye you can spot it aha
found it and sometimes it's just
underground The Design Center 120 cars
under garage and no space is wasted
normally next to a parking garage it's
an ugly alley where like drug deals go
down and stuff but look here cute little
houses more which will eventually appear
on these vacant Lots next to another new
parking garage part of this Midtown
downtown a neighborhood of row houses
here front doors all the way along no
driveways or garages just on street
parking you think oh that's going to be
terrible because that means I'm fighting
for a space in front of my house every
day but that's not true it's got more
cool suburb stuff than you think did you
walk around back there's an alley open
so everybody can see so you're not going
to get mug two car garage doors for
every unit plenty of room to park and if
you have guests come over they'll
probably find a spot on the street
because they're the huge Municipal
garages so they're not running out of
space you're thinking oh Rob's getting
too excited about those parking garages
I think that's Carl's Secret Sauce
parking everywhere so it's not a problem
but the real secret is the way Carmel
figured out a way to pay for all of
these parking garages you ever notice
that when you park on the ground it's
free makes sense cuz the way your car
just transfers right to the dirt but as
soon as you have to park in a garage
they give you a ticket and you have to
pay as you exit well that's because this
thing's so expensive with all the
columns and beams and everything they're
literally building a building strong
enough to hold a vehicle up in the air
to store your car in a garage like this
one costs
$50,000 per parking space and that's on
the cheap end subterrain is incredibly
expensive probably 30 to 50% more per
space
cuz you have to ventilate them Etc in a
downtown area like Indianapolis you have
all those high-rise buildings full of
people who are potential customers who
may be willing to pay for a parking spot
to help pay off the garage but in
suburbs like caramel you just don't have
that many customers that's why you don't
see more parking garages in the suburbs
okay so imagine two big box do want to
open new locations in your suburb and
one wants to be responsible use less
land put all that parking in a garage
well to pay for it they either need to
charge you to park there or raised their
prices on the shelf and that's just not
going to compete with the other store
that slapped pavement on top of a field
and made parking free that's how we wind
up with every building at every suburb
having big parking lots spreading the
town out but what if there was a way to
get the parking garage basically for
free this video is not sponsored by
garbage box algorithm curated garbage
delivered straight to your doorstep
every single day whether you want it or
not
[Music]
suburbs can do something pretty
incredible if they can hide the parking
lots which means building garages that
suburbs can't afford But Carmel Indiana
found a TG tips the only way you can
really do it tax increment financing or
Tiff what is that say you have a piece
of property and undeveloped it makes
basically no money in property tax each
year and if you slap a big box shopping
center out there with all the parking
that's required the the assessed
property value per acre that the city
can make off of that is about this the
building's worth something but the
parking lot's not worth really anything
so what if we help the developer put the
parking underground they build something
really dense the taxable assessed value
per acre is off the charts and you have
a bunch of land left over that you can
also develop the only way to make that
kind of insane money off such a little
bit of land is if there's a parking
garage there so what if we took the
difference in property tax take the
money we get after the new development
the parking garage are done and use it
to pay off the parking garage over 30
years and then after that the city is
making crazy high taxes basically
forever which is only possible because
we built a parking garage which we paid
for using the first 30 years of taxes
you still with me here so if this kind
of confuses you that's fine Tiff
confuses me too but wrapping my head
around it let's make a chart here so the
vertical access that's the total amount
of money the city makes over time so
that'll pile up and then this is of
course time the big box shopping center
it starts making money right away at a
rate like this over time and the money
just sort of piles up that the city can
use for services like police and fire
and whatnot but the shopping center with
Tiff well we're paying for the parking
garage for like 30 years then you hit
that 30y year mark and it starts making
money at five times the rate of this
shopping center so it starts growing
like
this all of this here starts being pure
profit after this break even Point At
You Know 30 35 years or whatever and
then the city's making tons of money
forever after that but for this to work
the building has to last more than 30
years getting access to tax money means
you're not just getting approval from
the city you're kind of getting a
business partner then they're very
involved I had a weekly call with them
for 9 months on the project at Rangeline
in Main Street they were involved in
Brick selection very detailed in their
architectural of that building in this
one the city has a financial interest in
making sure your development sticks
around for a while it's Pro development
but you're going to build a really nice
product in the beginning you know I had
to convince the lenders they didn't
think it would work there a lot of
skepticism in the business Financial
Community but then it works so well now
we have lines of people trying to endure
Tiff deals in Carl one of the first Tiff
projects Sophia Square here will start
paying its full property tax in about a
decade and in Caramel they've done away
with the city
backing the Tiff bonds so these are
Developer backs we have to buy the bonds
Finance against the Tiff and borrow
money from a bank and Tiff can pay for
more than just parking garages I'm
having to stop it catch my breath
because there's just so much to see it
and this thing here in front of me is a
bicycle trail it's kind of like a
freeway with people going back and forth
on it with so many buildings close
together the share of trips by bicycle
is quite High normally when I film along
a bik trail I kind of stage so a bike
happens to pass by right as I'm doing
the stand up but along here I I don't
have to Stage it cuz bike's just keep
coming the Tiff money helps make the
trail really luxurious look even at the
type of brick work they did they have
the slightly different colored bricks
here sort of like a center line at the
heart of this dense development a Civic
square with stealthy features that turn
it into a parking lot when events are
not happening look they did the same
thing here with the brick work on
parking spaces instead of a big ugly
white or yellow line instead of turning
a parking lot into a temporary Plaza
turn a plaza into a temporary parking
lot we close this off the farmers market
all the ballards there have water and
electricity in them farther up town
carel becomes even more urban this is an
example see how narrow the vehicular
road is versus the bike and pedestrian
road we don't even have speed limit
signs this has to be the narrowest
modern Street I've ever seen like I
think I can almost do the splits AC and
that's how I
died like everywhere in Caramel cars are
welcome everywhere but parking is
prioritized differently and look they
did it again bricks in a different
pattern here to separate the on street
parking from the through traffic and
they have these two gray tiles to
separate spaces out so you don't have to
have ugly paint on here and it's
permanent they don't have to maintain
that and even though we already have a
really nice bicycle trail and pedestrian
walk way in the park there didn't stop
the city for putting in a huge sidewalk
off to the side anyway it may copy
European design but Europe doesn't have
one of these and look there's your huge
public parking but not all of the supply
on the ground needs to be replaced
contrast here with the big box store
across the street but then on the left
is a perfect example of new urbanism I
wish Meyer would sell off the edge right
along the street we give up three story
buildings there and hide that parking
lot a bit it's pretty unlikely that this
parking lot has ever been 100% full so
if the rules allowed them to sell their
excess the city could get more
development and still have more than
enough surface parking left over for all
of their customers needs you might not
need as many spaces as you think you
have to convince the market that
multifam is complimentary with office
because this is only daytime parking
whereas the others are more nighttime so
they work in tandem well together see
these big parking lots here so we're
engaged in discussions with almost all
these bu buing owners we see Urban
Villages taking place as we develop
these parking lots into little walkable
areas with mixed use urban planners have
always made an altruistic case of why
cities ought to build up and if their
arguments just don't appeal to you well
maybe carmel's economic development case
might we built 72,000 ft of office 35
apartments eight high-end condos in 310
car parking garage on 1.7 Acres yeah we
couldn't fit another post poage stamp on
that site probably if we were to build
just one building it would have been
35,000 ft because we would have had to
keep all the rest for surface parking I
never expected going to film a short
video about roundabouts would turn into
1 2 3 four videos about one city but I
promise I'm on to other places now and
if you find yourself new here hey you
just sat through 13 minutes about Tiff
financing so you might want to consider
subscribing cuz if that's up your alley
you're going to love the other stuff
here